We are now going to consider an object which
moves in three-dimensional space, for instance
this airplane but it could be a flying robot,
it could be an underwater robot.
I want to describe its position within the
world.
And we are going to use the same process that
we did for two dimensions.
We’re going to introduce a reference coordinate
frame.
Now, for the three-dimensional case, this
is a three-dimensional coordinate frame.
It’s got an x-axis, a y-axis and a z-axis.
And, I’m going to put it at an arbitrary
place in the world and that is going to be
our reference coordinate frame.
In three dimensions, we used a coordinate
frame that looks like this and there are a
lot of similarities to the 2D coordinate frame
we looked at in the last lecture.
There are three axes.
They are x, y and z and they meet at angles
of 90 degrees to each other.
The point where they all intersect is referred
to as the origin.
So, these three axes together form what we
call a three-dimensional coordinate frame.
Let’s introduce a point now and we want
to describe the point with respect to the
3D coordinate frame.
We do this by dropping a line down to the
XY plane and measuring the displacement A
along the x-axis, the displacement B along
the y-axis and the displacement C along the
z-axis.
So, we can represent the point by three numbers.
We call this a tuple, a 3-tuple, and that’s
basically a group of three numbers, the numbers
A, B and C and they are the coordinates of
the point.
So, we can consider a point is a location
in an n-dimensional space.
A mathematician would write that as P belonging
to the set of real numbers to the power of
n.
And in this particular case, n is equal to
three.
In the most general sense, we can represent
the coordinate as a group or a tuple of n
numbers.
Again, in this case, n equals three, so it
represents a point by a coordinate which comprises
three numbers.
We can describe a vector in terms of three
components: a component A parallel to the
x-axis, component B parallel to the y-axis,
and a component C parallel to the z-axis.
And, we represent the vector P using the lower
case symbol p and a column vector.
That’s a stack of numbers one above the
other: the distance A, the distance B and
the distance C. A vector is an element of
an n-dimensional vector space.
A mathematician would say that lower case
p belongs to the set of real numbers to the
power of n.
Again, in this case, n equals 3.
We can also represent a vector by an n element
column vector.
That’s n numbers stacked one above the other.
We can consider a vector as a relative displacement.
That’s how we get from the origin, our reference
point, to the point p in a straight line.
All the vectors that we’re going to consider
start at the origin, so we refer to these
as bound vectors.
They have a particular starting point.
And, that means that the vector shown here
in red is different to this vector shown here
even though it has got the same length and
the same orientation in space.
Another way we can describe vectors is in
terms of a set of orthogonal unit vectors.
Let’s introduce the unit vectors, x-hat,
y-hat and z-hat.
Now, each of these vectors has got a length
of one and they are parallel to the coordinate
axes, x, y and z.
Now, we can represent our vector lower case
p in terms of the unit vectors.
A time x-hat, B times y-hat, plus C times
z-hat.
There are some similarities, but some important
differences between points and vectors.
Points define a location.
It’s not possible.
It doesn’t make any sense to add or multiply
points.
Vectors do not define location.
They specify how to get from one location
to another or from one point to another.
Now, we can add and subtract vectors, that
makes perfect sense and we can multiply a
vector by a scalar.
We can make the vector longer or shorter while
maintaining its direction.
The difference between two points is a vector.
And a point can be defined as a vector with
respect to another point and that point is
typically the origin of the coordinate frame.
Points and vectors are both represented by
a group of n real numbers.
N, in our case, is three because we’re talking
about three-dimensional space.
A point is typically represented as a row
vector, a list of numbers inside parenthesis,
whereas a vector is typically represented
as a stack of the n numbers one above the
other and typically in square brackets.
Now, I can describe the position of the airplane
with respect to this coordinate system.
I need to define a reference point on the
airplane.
I need to describe one particular location.
So, let’s say the tip of the airplane’s
nose.
Now, I can measure that distance.
Roughly, I’d say it’s about 35 centimetres
in the X direction and it might be something
like 18 centimetres in the Y direction and
it’s something like 13 centimetres in the
Z direction.
So, I can describe the position of this particular
point in the 3-dimensional world by those
three numerical coordinates.